[[Motivation (BV)]]
Less than 30 percent of the Earths surface is covered by land and the rest is covered by water. Human knowledge about the land has been improved dramatically in the recent centuries; however, our understanding from underwater environment has not grown remarkably due to reasons such as vast area, high pressure, and harsh environment. In recent years, Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) are employed in different military and civilian applications, which require unattended operation and has brought about tremendous revolution in these applications (Akyildiz et al., 2002; Yick et al., 2008; Akkaya and Younis, 2005; Al-Karaki and Kamal, 2004). This dramatic growth of WSNs encourages researchers to venture this technology into the underwater environments, which is called Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks (UWSNs) (Heidemann et al., 2006; Akyildiz et al., 2004; Akyildiz and Vuran, 2010).

UWSN is composed of a variable number of autonomous and self-organizing sensor nodes and vehicles, which are equipped with acoustic modem and deployed manually or randomly in different depths of interested area in deep or shallow water. These nodes sense the ambient data and transmit the sensing data through intermediate nodes to sink nodes on water surface. Then, the sink nodes transmit the collected data to onshore or offshore base stations for analyzing (Akyildiz et al., 2004; Ovaliadis et al., 2010).

The use of wireless sensor networks in underwater environments has led to new challenges as follow. First, high radio frequency is rapidly absorbed in water and low radio frequency requires very large antenna (Melodia et al., 2013; Akyildiz et al., 2004, 2005; Heidemann et al., 2006). Furthermore, using the optical waves are not efficient in these environments because the optical waves suffer from scattering in underwater and they need high accuracy in the connection point of laser beams, while the nodes move by water current and are not fixed in a certain position (Melodia et al., 2013). Therefore, the acoustic wave is the most appropriate communication medium in the underwater environments (Melodia et al., 2013; Heidemann et al., 2006; Stojanovic, 2003). Second, the use of acoustic in the communication channel has emerge several new challenges such as high propagation delay, high packet loss, high energy consumption, and low bandwidth (Casari and Zorzi, 2011; Akyildiz et al., 2005). Third, due to the presence of water currents in underwater environments, the sensor nodes deployed in different depths of water can move freely and create a high dynamic network topology (Guo et al., 2008). Fourth, UWSNs suffer from sparse network topology due to three-dimensional area, costly underwater equipments, and dynamic topology (Ovaliadis et al., 2010). Fifth, the Global Positioning System (GPS) cannot be used in underwater environment because of rapid absorption of high radio frequency in water (Melodia et al., 2013; Akyildiz et al., 2004; Ayaz et al., 2011).

Due to unique characteristics of UWSNs, the existing sensor nodes and protocols for Terrestrial Wireless Sensor Networks (TWSNs) should be adapted in terms of hardware and software, respectively, for using in UWSNs. Therefore, research in different fields of UWSNs has begun recently. Several reseaches have been performed on the bottom layers of network protocol stack such as physical channel (Hovem, 2007; Jeon et al., 2011), MAC protocols (Chirdchoo et al., 2007; Climent et al., 2014; Nguyen et al., 2007), localization techniques (Erol-Kantarci et al., 2011; Sheng and Hu, 2005; Erol et al., 2007; Moradi et al., 2012), routing (Pompili et al., 2006b; Xie et al., 2006; Hwang and Kim, 2008; Yan et al., 2008; Ayaz et al., 2010a; Wahid et al., 2012). Routing a packet from an underwater sensor node to sink nodes on water surface is one of the crucial problems in UWSNs (Ayaz et al., 2011; Xie et al., 2006; Wahid and Dongkyun, 2010; Climent et al., 2014). Although several researches have been performed to deal with routing problem in UWSNs, any of them have own advantage and disadvantages. Hence, there is still a need to develop routing algorithms that can achieve the less energy consumption and high packet delivery ratio.