In UWSNs, the energy of underwater nodes are supplied by battery and they suffer from energy constraint (Huang et al., 2011; Wahid and Kim, 2012). Due to the use of acoustic for communication, the energy consumption for transmission and receiving in UWSNs is much more than terrestrial wireless sensor networks (Casari and Zorzi, 2011). Therefore, each underwater node spends the major part of its energy for transmission and receiving the packets (Casari and Zorzi, 2011). Routing algorithm plays a key role in the amount of transmission and receiving in network. Thus, some measures should be taken into account in underwater routing algorithms to achieve the energy efficiency. Based on techniques employed by existing routing algorithms to increase the energy efficiency, the existing energy efficient routing algorithms can be classified into two main approaches, namely, mobile-relay node approach and traffic reduction approach. In the first approach, few underwater unmanned vehicles move based on a pattern and collect the data packet from underwater sensor nodes (Magistretti et al., 2007; Ayaz et al., 2010b). Since these vesicles are so expensive, using this approach imposes high cost to network. In the second approach, the routing algorithms carefully are designed to reduce the routing traffic and achieve the energy efficiency (Nicolaou et al., 2007; Yan et al., 2008; Wahid and Kim, 2012; Ayaz and Abdullah, 2009). Due to the unique characteristics of UWSNs such as high propagation delay, dynamic topology, and high prone to error links, the opportunistic routing approach is employed by majority of existing routing algorithms in UWSNs (Lee et al., 2010; Liu et al., 2009; Prodhan et al., 2011). This routing approach employs greedy flooding technique and provides appropriate packet delivery ratio and throughput; however, it suffers from high network traffic and high energy consumption (Pelusi et al., 2006; Schaefer et al., 2009; Lee et al., 2010; Biswas and Morris, 2005). Thus, careful design of an opportunistic routing algorithm can effectively reduce the unnecessary network traffic and reduce the total energy consumption while providing satisfactory packet delivery ratio. To achieve energy efficient opportunistic routing algorithm in UWSNs, several studies have been conducted (Huang et al., 2011; Ashrafuddin et al., 2013; Jafri et al., 2013; Yan et al., 2008; Liang et al., 2007). A commonly-used solution for energy efficient opportunistic routing in UWSNs is careful selection of greedy advancement area. Based on the need for position information of nodes for selecting the advancement area, the existing energy efficient opportunistic routing algorithms in UWSNs can be divided into two main categories, namely location-based and location-free. Due to the inapplicability of GPS in underwater environments and high mobility of nodes, finding the location information of nodes is so costly and imposes high energy consumption to network (Yan et al., 2008; Wahid and Kim, 2012; Ayaz and Abdullah, 2009). Therefore, these algorithms waste the energy of nodes for finding the position of nodes. In contrast, energy efficient location-free category does not require the position information of nodes and can be divided into two subcategories: beacon- based and pressure-based. In the beacon-based subcategory, each node needs topology information to select the advancement area, while finding this information in mobile UWSNs imposes high overhead and high energy consumption to network. However, in the pressure-based subcategory, each node is equipped with a pressure sensor and measures its depth locally based on pressure of water and employs the depth information for identifying the greedy advancement area (Yan et al., 2008). For this reason, the pressure-based routings do not impose extra overhead and energy consumption for the selection of advancement area. Consequently, due to limited energy source, the pressure-based routing algorithms are more promising routing methods in terms of energy efficiency. Therefore, this research is focused on designing an energy efficient pressure-based routing algorithm for UWSNs.

In opportunistic routing algorithms, ranking the nodes in advancement area has direct impact on energy consumption and packet delivery ratio (Liu et al., 2009; Mao et al., 2009). This is because most of opportunistic routing algorithms employ overhear and suppression algorithm to reduce the duplicate packet forwarding through nodes in advancement area (Nicolaou et al., 2007; Yan et al., 2008; Wahid and Kim, 2012). In this algorithm, nodes are ranked and the highest ranked node immediately forwards the data packet, while other nodes hold the packet. A lower ranked node forwards the data packet if it does not overhear forwarding the same packet by higher ranked node during the computed holding time. Several ranking techniques have been proposed to increase the energy efficiency in opportunistic routing algorithms (Nicolaou et al., 2007; Yan et al., 2008; Wahid and Kim, 2012). Most of existing location-based and beacon-based algorithms employ parameters for ranking, which are obtained from position information and topology information, respectively. However, finding this information wastes the energy of nodes. In addition, some of the existing pressure- based routing algorithms rank the nodes based on depth or hop count information to reduce the number of hop and decrease the energy consumption (Yan et al., 2008; Noh et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2010). EEPR (Wahid and Kim, 2012) uses residual energy to balance the energy of nodes and increase the network lifetime. Furthermore, some algorithms compute a weight based on depth and residual energy to jointly consider the hop count and energy balancing (Jafri et al., 2013; Guangzhong and Zhibin, 2010). Nevertheless, there is still a need to develop a fair ranking algorithm that reduces the energy consumption while providing a reasonable packet delivery ratio.

The behavior of forwarder node when its advancement area is empty has a great effect on the performance of opportunistic routing algorithm. This issue is known as communication void that commonly occurs in UWSNs due to sparse network topology. Several recent algorithms have been introduced to handle the communication void in UWSNs. Some of existing algorithms propose a solution to handle the communication void after it occurs (Lee et al., 2010; Xie et al., 2009a; Jornet et al., 2008; Shin et al., 2012), whereas, other algorithms suggest a solution to identify and avoid the void nodes in the packet forwarding process (Noh et al., 2013). The majority of existing solutions employ the position information of nodes or topology information to handle the communication void which is so costly. Therefore, developing efficient void detection and avoidance algorithms without the use of location information and topology information still is necessary to improve the packet delivery ratio, especially in sparse networks.

Duplicate packet forwarding is one of main issues in opportunistic routing algorithms, which increase network traffic and the energy consumption (Lee et al., 2010; Bayrakdar et al., 2011). The overhear and suppression algorithm is commonly used to handle this issue in opportunistic routing algorithms. The size of advancement area has direct impact on performance of overhear and suppression algorithms (Liu et al., 2009), thus small size advancement area increases the efficiency of overhear and suppression algorithm, while large size advancement area reduces the efficiency of this algorithm. Consequently, selecting an appropriate size for advancement area is a big challenge in opportunistic routing algorithms. Majority of the existing routing algorithms suffer from a fixed size for advancement area (Yan et al., 2008; Nicolaou et al., 2007; Xie et al., 2006; Wahid et al., 2011). In the location-based category, Shin et al. (2012) proposed a solution to handle this issue in which each forwarder node dynamically selected slim, sawteeth, and fat shape as advancement area based on average link quality of its neighbouring nodes in advancement area. On the other hand, the location-free routing category suffered from large advancement area Noh et al. (2013) and Lee et al. (2010) proposed the same solution to handle this issue. They optimized the forwarding set selection algorithm so that all nodes in forwarding set could overhear each other. The main drawback of this scheme is that it required costly 2-hop neighboring nodes distance information. As a result, enhancing the overhear and suppression algorithm in pressure-based routing algorithms without the use of location information and topology information is essential to reduce the unnecessary network traffic due to duplicate packet forwarding and reduce the energy consumption.