In UWSNs, underwater nodes spend main part of their limited energy to transmit the data packets. Thus, several energy efficient pressure-based opportunistic routing algorithms have been introduced to reduce the energy consumption while provide satisfactory packet delivery ratio. Each of these algorithms has its own advantages and disadvantages.

Despite the importance of ranking the nodes in greedy advancement area, existing energy efficient pressure-based routing algorithms has paid less attention to this factor (Yan et al., 2008; Noh et al., 2013; Wahid and Kim, 2012), whereas inefficient ranking methods lead to high energy consumption and low packet delivery ratio. Most of the existing pressure-based routing algorithms do not take into account the multi-criteria to rank the nodes in advancement area, which results in higher energy consumption and lower packet delivery ratio. Each node individually ranks its neighboring nodes in advancement area. In order to reduce the energy consumption and provide the satisfactory packet delivery ratio, it is necessary to design and develop an algorithm that can fairly rank the nodes in advancement area based on multi-criteria.

Communication void leads to packet loss and reduces the packet delivery ratio, especially in sparse networks. Only few opportunistic routing algorithms pay attention to communication void in UWSNs (Xie et al., 2009a; Noh et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2010; Shin et al., 2012). The existing solutions employ the location information and topology information to handle this issue. However, such algorithms are not energy efficient because finding this information in UWSNs with dynamic topology causes the energy of nodes to be wasted. For these reasons, it is essential to introduce a novel void avoidance algorithm that can detect the void nodes without the use of location information and topology information and avoid these nodes in packet forwarding process to improve the packet delivery ratio, especially in sparse networks.

Despite the fact that overhear and suppression algorithm cannot efficiently suppress duplicate packet forwarding in opportunistic routing algorithms with large size advancement area, the existing pressure-based routing algorithms have paid less attention to this issue (Noh et al., 2013; Lee et al., 2010). Taking into consideration this issue results in lower network traffic and lower energy consumption. However, the existing solutions use location information to control the size of advancement area and improve the efficiency of overhear and suppression algorithm, while finding this information leads to wasting the energy of nodes. Therefore, it is necessary to design and develop a new algorithm to improve the efficiency of overhear and suppression algorithm without the use of location information and topology information in order to reduce the unnecessary network traffic and decrease the total energy consumption.